Blog for KEP-5836: Scheduler Preemption for In-Place Pod Resize (alpha) (#56461)
kubernetes/website: content/en/blog/_posts/2026/scheduler-preemption-for-in-place-pod-resize.md

Reviewer: Style nit, that you should fix: all the headings (but not the article title) should be in sentence case.

eg Single-node preemption boundary, not Single-Node Preemption Boundary.

Author: done!

---
layout: blog
title: "Kubernetes v1.37: Scheduler Preemption for In-Place Pod Resize (Alpha)"
slug: scheduler-preemption-in-place-pod-resize-alpha
draft: true
author: "Natasha Sarkar (Google)"
---

In Kubernetes, resource allocation has historically been a static decision made during a pod's initial scheduling and placement. With the graduation of the core [In-Place Pod Vertical Scaling](/blog/2025/12/19/kubernetes-v1-35-in-place-pod-resize-ga/) feature to General Availability in v1.35, application developers and cluster operators gained the powerful ability to dynamically adjust CPU and memory allocations of running containers without incurring disruptive restarts or application downtime. 

However, in-place resizing introduced a unique resource scheduling gap: if a running pod requested a resource scale-up that exceeded the host node's allocatable headroom, the Kubelet was forced to mark the request as `Deferred`. The pod would remain parked in this state indefinitely, waiting for resources on the node to naturally free up. 

> To bridge this scheduling gap, Kubernetes introduces **Scheduler Preemption for In-Place Pod Resize** (Alpha) under the `InPlacePodVerticalScalingSchedulerPreemption` feature gate. This feature allows the Kubernetes control plane to actively free up capacity on a fully-utilized node by preempting lower-priority workloads, enabling the pending in-place resizes of critical, higher-priority applications to succeed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To bridge this scheduling gap, Kubernetes v1.37 introduces *scheduler preemption for in-place Pod resize* (Alpha), behind the `InPlacePodVerticalScalingSchedulerPreemption` feature gate.
This feature allows the Kubernetes control plane to actively free up capacity on a fully-utilized node by preempting lower-priority workloads, enabling the pending in-place resizes of critical, higher-priority applications to succeed.
```

Author: done!

If the node's resources are fully utilized and cannot satisfy the new limits, the Kubelet sets the container's `resizeStatus` (reported in the Pod's `status.containerStatuses[]`) to `Deferred`. Unlike an `Infeasible` resize request (which is immediately rejected because it exceeds physical machine boundaries, namespace limit ranges, or admission quotas) a `Deferred` status indicates that the request is valid but is temporarily unable to be actuated, waiting until node capacity becomes available.

Before the introduction of this preemption mechanism, a pod's in-place resize scale-up request could become permanently blocked if the node was heavily utilized. If a critical application (such as an in-memory database or a real-time web server) required more memory to prevent an imminent out-of-memory (OOM) crash, and the node lacked free capacity, the resize remained `Deferred`. 

In this scenario, cluster administrators had limited choices:
1. Manually evict lower-priority pods from the node to clear resource headroom.

> 2. Rely on the cluster autoscaler to eventually spin up a larger node and reschedule the pod. However, this is an operation that is highly disruptive and violates the core "no restart" value proposition of in-place scaling.

Reviewer 2: Isn't it possible to scale up node itself without spinning up a new one?

Author: On some specific nodes yes, such as GKE EKs. Other cloud providers probably have this kind of elastic nodes as well. But AFAIK "node resize" is not an official concept in OSS kubernetes, I think https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/issues/3953 is attempting to introduce it.

I am not sure how common it is for resizing pods to be on a 'resizable' node. 

I added 3rd choice here: 

> Rely on a custom autoscaling solution, for example a cluster autoscaler that can trigger dynamic node resizing operations itself.

to try to capture this.

### Single-Node Preemption Boundary
Unlike placement preemption, which evaluates all nodes in a cluster to find the best scheduling fit, preemption for in-place resizing is strictly localized to the pod's currently assigned node. The scheduler identifies eligible lower-priority "victim" pods on the same host and initiates their graceful eviction, freeing up local capacity.

### Resource Reservation Safety
To prevent scheduling races and double-allocation, the requested resource delta is considered **already consumed** by the scheduler. These resources are blocked from being assigned to any other scheduling operations, remaining locked until either:
* The Kubelet successfully actuates the resize.
* Or the resize request is reverted back to the original size.

The scheduler computes these effective allocations using a unified resource-accounting safety formula:

> $$\text{Effective Pod Request} = \max(\text{Spec.Requests}, \text{Status.AllocatedResources}, \text{Status.Resources.Requests})$$

Reviewer: ```suggestion
$$\text{Effective Pod Request} = \max(\text{spec.requests}, \text{status.allocatedResources}, \text{status.resources.requests})$$
```

Author: done!

---
layout: blog
title: "Kubernetes v1.37: Scheduler Preemption for In-Place Pod Resize (Alpha)"
slug: scheduler-preemption-in-place-pod-resize-alpha
draft: true

> date: XXXX-XX-XX

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion

```
We use Hugo as static site generator and the build is  failing cause the date field is not parseable , **No need to put this field in front matter entirely**

Author: Oh my bad, misunderstood something. Took it out!

slug: scheduler-preemption-in-place-pod-resize-alpha
draft: true
author: "Natasha Sarkar (Google)"
---

In Kubernetes, resource allocation has historically been a static decision made during a Pod's initial scheduling and placement. With the graduation of the core [in-Place Pod resize](/blog/2025/12/19/kubernetes-v1-35-in-place-Pod-resize-ga/) feature to General Availability in v1.35, application developers and cluster operators gained the powerful ability to dynamically adjust CPU and memory allocations of running containers without incurring disruptive restarts or application downtime.

However, in-place resizing introduced a unique resource scheduling gap: if a running Pod requested a resource scale-up that exceeded the host node's allocatable headroom, the Kubelet was forced to mark the request as `Deferred`. The Pod would remain parked in this state indefinitely, waiting for resources on the node to naturally free up.

To bridge this scheduling gap, Kubernetes v1.37 introduces *scheduler preemption for in-place Pod resize* (Alpha), behind the `InPlacePodVerticalScalingSchedulerPreemption` feature gate.

> This feature allows the Kubernetes control plane to actively free up capacity on a fully-utilized node by preempting lower-priority workloads, enabling the pending in-place resizes of critical, higher-priority applications to succeed.

Reviewer 4: You talk about the scheduler below, so it might be more clear to just refer to the scheduler here.
```suggestion
This feature allows the Kubernetes scheduler to actively free up capacity on a fully-utilized node by preempting lower-priority workloads, enabling the pending in-place resizes of critical, higher-priority applications to succeed.
```

## The "deferred" resize challenge

> To understand why this preemption mechanism is needed, it is helpful to look at how Kubernetes handles running Pod resizing. When a user or controller (such as the Vertical Pod Autoscaler) updates the resource requests of an active container, the Kubelet evaluates whether the underlying node has enough spare allocatable capacity to fulfill the increase.

Reviewer 4: consider linking to VPA here.

### Single-node preemption boundary
Unlike placement preemption, which evaluates all nodes in a cluster to find the best scheduling fit, preemption for in-place resizing is strictly localized to the Pod's currently assigned node. The scheduler identifies eligible lower-priority "victim" Pods on the same host and initiates their graceful eviction, freeing up local capacity.

### Resource reservation safety
To prevent scheduling races and double-allocation, the requested resource delta is considered **already consumed** by the scheduler. These resources are blocked from being assigned to any other scheduling operations, remaining locked until either:
* The Kubelet successfully actuates the resize.

> * Or the resize request is reverted back to the original size.

Reviewer 4: This is a little confusing. I'm not sure you need to go into the nuances of how the resources are consumed. Maybe something like this?

```suggestion
To prevent scheduling races and double-allocation, the scheduler treats resources requested for a resize as **already consumed**. This enables the Kubelet to actuate the resize once the preemption takes effect.
```

The scheduler computes these effective allocations using a unified resource-accounting safety formula:
$$\text{Effective Pod Request} = \max(\text{spec.requests}, \text{status.allocatedResources}, \text{status.resources.requests})$$

### Separation of concerns & critical admission

> A significant architectural benefit of this design is the strict separation of concerns between the Kubelet and the scheduler. Under this feature gate, **the Kubelet's critical Pod admission handler no longer runs local preemption checks or triggers local evictions for in-place resizing operations.** Instead, the Kubelet defers the request and delegates the preemption decision entirely to the scheduler. This guarantees that a single, centralized orchestrator manages all resize-related preemption logic, respecting global priorities, Pod disruption budgets (PDBs), and graceful termination policies.

Reviewer 4: Not many people know about the critical pod admission handler. You should introduce it first.

## Node-level preemption configuration

Administrators and automated controllers (such as a cluster autoscaler) can disable preemption specifically for in-place resizes on particular nodes. This is configured using the new `spec.podPreemptionPolicy` field in the Node Spec:

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Node
metadata:
  name: batch-workload-node
spec:
  podPreemptionPolicy:
    disableResizePreemption:
      - "cluster-autoscaler.kubernetes.io/disable-preemption"
      - "operator.example.com/policy-override"
```

An example use case for this policy is when a controller would prefer to size down other pods or dynamically adjust the node capacity itself when possible, only enabling scheduler preemption as a last resort.

### API constraints & validation limits

* **List Execution**: The node-level bypass policy is honored **if and only if** the `disableResizePreemption` list is non-empty.
* **Maximum Size**: The array can contain a maximum of **20 items**.

> * **Value Format**: Each string in the list must conform strictly to the standard **Kubernetes label key format** (up to 63 characters with optional DNS subdomain prefixes).

Reviewer 4: I'd remove this. I think it's an unnecessary level of detail for a blog post.

> ## Prerequisites and limitations

Reviewer 4: nit: consider making this more actionable, maybe "Getting started" or "Try it out!"

> To utilize Scheduler Preemption for in-place Pod resize:

Reviewer 4: Reiterate that it requires a v1.37+ cluster (CP + nodes)

> * Both the base `InPlacePodVerticalScaling` and the `InPlacePodVerticalScalingSchedulerPreemption` feature gates must be enabled across all control plane components (`kube-apiserver`, `kube-scheduler`) and the `kubelet`.

Reviewer 4: InPlacePodVerticalScaling is GA, I don't think you need to mention it here.
```suggestion
* The `InPlacePodVerticalScalingSchedulerPreemption` feature gate must be enabled across all control plane components (`kube-apiserver`, `kube-scheduler`) and the `kubelet`.
```

> * Preemption is strictly scoped to the same node where the deferred Pod is running. If a node cannot accommodate the resize even after evicting all eligible lower-priority workloads, the resize remains in the `Deferred` state.

Reviewer 4: Move this to the "Single Node Preemption boundary" section.

> 

Reviewer 4: Consider adding a mini-tutorial here. E.g. create a low and high priority pod taking up most of a node, resize the high priority pod, and observe the eviction.
